
# Forecasting: Principles and Practice(3rd ed)


## 11.1Hierarchical and grouped time series


### Hierarchical time series


Figure11.1shows a simple hierarchical structure. At the top of the hierarchy is the “Total”, the most aggregate level of the data. The\(t\)th observation of the Total series is denoted by\(y_t\)for\(t=1,\dots,T\). The Total is disaggregated into two series, which in turn are divided into three and two series respectively at the bottom level of the hierarchy. Below the top level, we use\(y_{j,t}\)to denote the\(t\)th observation of the series corresponding to node\(j\). For example,\(\y{A}{t}\)denotes the\(t\)th observation of the series corresponding to node A,\(\y{AB}{t}\)denotes the\(t\)th observation of the series corresponding to node AB, and so on.


Figure 11.1: A two level hierarchical tree diagram.


In this small example, the total number of series in the hierarchy is\(n=1+2+5=8\), while the number of series at the bottom level is\(m=5\). Note that\(n>m\)in all hierarchies.


For any time\(t\), the observations at the bottom level of the hierarchy will sum to the observations of the series above. For example,\[\begin{equation}
  y_{t}=\y{AA}{t}+\y{AB}{t}+\y{AC}{t}+\y{BA}{t}+\y{BB}{t},
  \tag{11.1}
\end{equation}\]\[\begin{equation}
  \y{A}{t}=\y{AA}{t}+\y{AB}{t}+\y{AC}{t}\qquad \text{and} \qquad  \y{B}{t}=\y{BA}{t}+\y{BB}{t}.
  \tag{11.2}
\end{equation}\]Substituting(11.2)into(11.1), we also get\(y_{t}=\y{A}{t}+\y{B}{t}\).


### Example: Australian tourism hierarchy


Australia is divided into six states and two territories, with each one having its own government and some economic and administrative autonomy. For simplicity, we refer to both states and territories as “states”. Each of these states can be further subdivided into regions as shown in Figure11.2and Table11.1. In total there are 76 such regions. Business planners and tourism authorities are interested in forecasts for the whole of Australia, for each of the states and territories, and also for the regions.


Figure 11.2: Australian states and tourism regions.


Thetourismtsibble contains data on quarterly domestic tourism demand, measured as the number of overnight trips Australians spend away from home. The key variablesStateandRegiondenote the geographical areas, while a further keyPurposedescribes the purpose of travel. For now, we will ignore the purpose of travel and just consider the geographic hierarchy. To make the graphs and tables simpler, we will recodeStateto use abbreviations.


```
tourism <- tsibble::tourism |>
  mutate(State = recode(State,
    `New South Wales` = "NSW",
    `Northern Territory` = "NT",
    `Queensland` = "QLD",
    `South Australia` = "SA",
    `Tasmania` = "TAS",
    `Victoria` = "VIC",
    `Western Australia` = "WA"
  ))
```


Using theaggregate_key()function, we can create the hierarchical time series with overnight trips in regions at the bottom level of the hierarchy, aggregated to states, which are aggregated to the national total. A hierarchical time series corresponding to the nested structure is created using aparent/childspecification.


```
tourism_hts <- tourism |>
  aggregate_key(State / Region, Trips = sum(Trips))
tourism_hts
#> # A tsibble: 6,800 x 4 [1Q]
#> # Key:       State, Region [85]
#>    Quarter State        Region        Trips
#>      <qtr> <chr*>       <chr*>        <dbl>
#>  1 1998 Q1 <aggregated> <aggregated> 23182.
#>  2 1998 Q2 <aggregated> <aggregated> 20323.
#>  3 1998 Q3 <aggregated> <aggregated> 19827.
#>  4 1998 Q4 <aggregated> <aggregated> 20830.
#>  5 1999 Q1 <aggregated> <aggregated> 22087.
#>  6 1999 Q2 <aggregated> <aggregated> 21458.
#>  7 1999 Q3 <aggregated> <aggregated> 19914.
#>  8 1999 Q4 <aggregated> <aggregated> 20028.
#>  9 2000 Q1 <aggregated> <aggregated> 22339.
#> 10 2000 Q2 <aggregated> <aggregated> 19941.
#> # ℹ 6,790 more rows
```


The newtsibblenow has some additional rows corresponding to state and national aggregations for each quarter. Figure11.3shows the aggregate total overnight trips for the whole of Australia as well as the states, revealing diverse and rich dynamics. For example, there is noticeable national growth since 2010 and for some states such as the ACT, New South Wales, Queensland, South Australia, and Victoria. There seems to be a significant jump for Western Australia in 2014.


```
tourism_hts |>
  filter(is_aggregated(Region)) |>
  autoplot(Trips) +
  labs(y = "Trips ('000)",
       title = "Australian tourism: national and states") +
  facet_wrap(vars(State), scales = "free_y", ncol = 3) +
  theme(legend.position = "none")
```


Figure 11.3: Domestic overnight trips from 1998 Q1 to 2017 Q4 aggregated by state.


```
tourism_hts |>
  filter(State == "NT" | State == "QLD" |
         State == "TAS" | State == "VIC", is_aggregated(Region)) |>
  select(-Region) |>
  mutate(State = factor(State, levels=c("QLD","VIC","NT","TAS"))) |>
  gg_season(Trips) +
  facet_wrap(vars(State), nrow = 2, scales = "free_y")+
  labs(y = "Trips ('000)")
```


Figure 11.4: Seasonal plots for overnight trips for Queensland and the Northern Territory, and Victoria and Tasmania highlighting the contrast in seasonal patterns between northern and southern states in Australia.


The seasonal pattern of the northern states, such as Queensland and the Northern Territory, leads to peak visits in winter (corresponding to Q3) due to the tropical climate and rainy summer months. In contrast, the southern states tend to peak in summer (corresponding to Q1). This is highlighted in the seasonal plots shown in Figure11.4for Queensland and the Northern Territory (shown in the left column) versus the most southern states of Victoria and Tasmania (shown in the right column).


Figure 11.5: Domestic overnight trips from 1998 Q1 to 2017 Q4 for some selected regions.


The plots in Figure11.5shows data for some selected regions. These help us visualise the diverse regional dynamics within each state, with some series showing strong trends or seasonality, some showing contrasting seasonality, while some series appear to be just noise.


### Grouped time series


With grouped time series, the data structure does not naturally disaggregate in a unique hierarchical manner. Figure11.6shows a simple grouped structure. At the top of the grouped structure is the Total, the most aggregate level of the data, again represented by\(y_t\). The Total can be disaggregated by attributes (A, B) forming series\(\y{A}{t}\)and\(\y{B}{t}\), or by attributes (X, Y) forming series\(\y{X}{t}\)and\(\y{Y}{t}\). At the bottom level, the data are disaggregated by both attributes.


Figure 11.6: Alternative representations of a two level grouped structure.


This example shows that there are alternative aggregation paths for grouped structures. For any time\(t\), as with the hierarchical structure,\[\begin{equation*}
y_{t}=\y{AX}{t}+\y{AY}{t}+\y{BX}{t}+\y{BY}{t}.
\end{equation*}\]However, for the first level of the grouped structure,\[\begin{equation} \y{A}{t}=\y{AX}{t}+\y{AY}{t}\quad \quad \y{B}{t}=\y{BX}{t}+\y{BY}{t}
\tag{11.3}
\end{equation}\]but also\[\begin{equation} \y{X}{t}=\y{AX}{t}+\y{BX}{t}\quad \quad \y{Y}{t}=\y{AY}{t}+\y{BY}{t}
\tag{11.4}.
\end{equation}\]


Grouped time series can sometimes be thought of as hierarchical time series that do not impose a unique hierarchical structure, in the sense that the order by which the series can be grouped is not unique.


### Example: Australian prison population


In this example we consider the Australia prison population data introduced in Chapter2. The top panel in Figure11.7shows the total number of prisoners in Australia over the period 2005Q1–2016Q4. This represents the top-level series in the grouping structure. The panels below show the prison population disaggregated or grouped by (a) state (b) legal status (whether prisoners have already been sentenced or are in remand waiting for a sentence), and (c) gender. The three factors are crossed, but none are nested within the others.


Figure 11.7: Total Australian quarterly adult prison population, disaggregated by state, by legal status, and by gender.


The following code, introduced in Section2.1, builds atsibbleobject for the prison data.


```
prison <- readr::read_csv("https://OTexts.com/fpp3/extrafiles/prison_population.csv") |>
  mutate(Quarter = yearquarter(Date)) |>
  select(-Date)  |>
  as_tsibble(key = c(Gender, Legal, State, Indigenous),
             index = Quarter) |>
  relocate(Quarter)
```


We create a grouped time series usingaggregate_key()with attributes or groupings of interest now being crossed using the syntaxattribute1*attribute2(in contrast to theparent/childsyntax used for hierarchical time series). The following code builds a grouped tsibble for the prison data with crossed attributes: gender, legal status and state.


```
prison_gts <- prison |>
  aggregate_key(Gender * Legal * State, Count = sum(Count)/1e3)
```


Usingis_aggregated()withinfilter()is helpful for exploring or plotting the main groups shown in the bottom panels of Figure11.7. For example, the following code plots the total numbers of female and male prisoners across Australia.


```
prison_gts |>
  filter(!is_aggregated(Gender), is_aggregated(Legal),
         is_aggregated(State)) |>
  autoplot(Count) +
  labs(y = "Number of prisoners ('000)")
```


Plots of other group combinations can be obtained in a similar way. Figure11.8shows the Australian prison population grouped by all possible combinations of two attributes at a time: state and gender, state and legal status, and legal status and gender. The following code will reproduce the first plot in Figure11.8.


Figure 11.8: Australian adult prison population disaggregated by pairs of attributes.


```
prison_gts |>
  filter(!is_aggregated(Gender), !is_aggregated(Legal),
         !is_aggregated(State)) |>
  mutate(Gender = as.character(Gender)) |>
  ggplot(aes(x = Quarter, y = Count,
             group = Gender, colour=Gender)) +
  stat_summary(fun = sum, geom = "line") +
  labs(title = "Prison population by state and gender",
       y = "Number of prisoners ('000)") +
  facet_wrap(~ as.character(State),
             nrow = 1, scales = "free_y") +
  theme(axis.text.x = element_text(angle = 90, hjust = 1))
```


Figure11.9shows the Australian adult prison population disaggregated by all three attributes: state, legal status and gender. These form the bottom-level series of the grouped structure.


Figure 11.9: Bottom-level time series for the Australian adult prison population, grouped by state, legal status and gender.


### Mixed hierarchical and grouped structure


Often disaggregating factors are both nested and crossed. For example, the Australian tourism data can also be disaggregated by the four purposes of travel: holiday, business, visiting friends and relatives, and other. This grouping variable does not nest within any of the geographical variables. In fact, we could consider overnight trips split by purpose of travel for the whole of Australia, and for each state, and for each region. We describe such a structure as a “nested” geographic hierarchy “crossed” with the purpose of travel. Usingaggregate_key()this can be specified by simply combining the factors.


```
tourism_full <- tourism |>
  aggregate_key((State/Region) * Purpose, Trips = sum(Trips))
```


Thetourism_fulltsibble contains 425 series, including the 85 series from the hierarchical structure, as well as another 340 series obtained when each series of the hierarchical structure is crossed with the purpose of travel.


Figure 11.10: Australian domestic overnight trips from 1998 Q1 to 2017 Q4 disaggregated by purpose of travel.


Figure 11.11: Australian domestic overnight trips over the period 1998 Q1 to 2017 Q4 disaggregated by purpose of travel and by state.


Figures11.10and11.11show the aggregate series grouped by purpose of travel, and the series grouped by purpose of travel and state, revealing further rich and diverse dynamics across these series.
