
# Forecasting: Principles and Practice(3rd ed)


## 9.3Autoregressive models


In a multiple regression model, introduced in Chapter7, we forecast the variable of interest using a linear combination of predictors. In an autoregression model, we forecast the variable of interest using a linear combination ofpast values of the variable. The termautoregression indicates that it is a regression of the variable against itself.


Thus, an autoregressive model of order\(p\)can be written as\[
  y_{t} = c + \phi_{1}y_{t-1} + \phi_{2}y_{t-2} + \dots + \phi_{p}y_{t-p} + \varepsilon_{t},
\]where\(\varepsilon_t\)is white noise. This is like a multiple regression but withlagged valuesof\(y_t\)as predictors. We refer to this as anAR(\(p\)) model, an autoregressive model of order\(p\).


Autoregressive models are remarkably flexible at handling a wide range of different time series patterns. The two series in Figure9.5show series from an AR(1) model and an AR(2) model. Changing the parameters\(\phi_1,\dots,\phi_p\)results in different time series patterns. The variance of the error term\(\varepsilon_t\)will only change the scale of the series, not the patterns.


Figure 9.5: Two examples of data from autoregressive models with different parameters. Left: AR(1) with\(y_t = 18 -0.8y_{t-1} + \varepsilon_t\). Right: AR(2) with\(y_t = 8 + 1.3y_{t-1}-0.7y_{t-2}+\varepsilon_t\). In both cases,\(\varepsilon_t\)is normally distributed white noise with mean zero and variance one.


For an AR(1) model:

- when\(\phi_1=0\)and\(c=0\),\(y_t\)is equivalent to white noise;
- when\(\phi_1=1\)and\(c=0\),\(y_t\)is equivalent to a random walk;
- when\(\phi_1=1\)and\(c\ne0\),\(y_t\)is equivalent to a random walk with drift;
- when\(\phi_1<0\),\(y_t\)tends to oscillate around the mean.

We normally restrict autoregressive models to stationary data, in which case some constraints on the values of the parameters are required.

- For an AR(1) model:\(-1 < \phi_1 < 1\).
- For an AR(2) model:\(-1 < \phi_2 < 1\),\(\phi_1+\phi_2 < 1\),\(\phi_2-\phi_1 < 1\).

When\(p\ge3\), the restrictions are much more complicated. Thefablepackage takes care of these restrictions when estimating a model.
