- Transform
- 18Missing values

# 18Missing values


## 18.1Introduction


You’ve already learned the basics of missing values earlier in the book. You first saw them inChapter 1where they resulted in a warning when making a plot as well as inSection 3.5.2where they interfered with computing summary statistics, and you learned about their infectious nature and how to check for their presence inSection 12.2.2. Now we’ll come back to them in more depth, so you can learn more of the details.


We’ll start by discussing some general tools for working with missing values recorded asNAs. We’ll then explore the idea of implicitly missing values, values that are simply absent from your data, and show some tools you can use to make them explicit. We’ll finish off with a related discussion of empty groups, caused by factor levels that don’t appear in the data.


### 18.1.1Prerequisites


The functions for working with missing data mostly come from dplyr and tidyr, which are core members of the tidyverse.


```
library(tidyverse)
```


## 18.2Explicit missing values


To begin, let’s explore a few handy tools for creating or eliminating missing explicit values, i.e. cells where you see anNA.


### 18.2.1Last observation carried forward


A common use for missing values is as a data entry convenience. When data is entered by hand, missing values sometimes indicate that the value in the previous row has been repeated (or carried forward):


```
treatment <- tribble(
  ~person,           ~treatment, ~response,
  "Derrick Whitmore", 1,         7,
  NA,                 2,         10,
  NA,                 3,         NA,
  "Katherine Burke",  1,         4
)
```


You can fill in these missing values withtidyr::fill(). It works likeselect(), taking a set of columns:


```
treatment |>
  fill(everything())
#> # A tibble: 4 × 3
#>   person           treatment response
#>   <chr>                <dbl>    <dbl>
#> 1 Derrick Whitmore         1        7
#> 2 Derrick Whitmore         2       10
#> 3 Derrick Whitmore         3       10
#> 4 Katherine Burke          1        4
```


This treatment is sometimes called “last observation carried forward”, orlocffor short. You can use the.directionargument to fill in missing values that have been generated in more exotic ways.


### 18.2.2Fixed values


Sometimes missing values represent some fixed and known value, most commonly 0. You can usedplyr::coalesce()to replace them:


```
x <- c(1, 4, 5, 7, NA)
coalesce(x, 0)
#> [1] 1 4 5 7 0
```


Sometimes you’ll hit the opposite problem where some concrete value actually represents a missing value. This typically arises in data generated by older software that doesn’t have a proper way to represent missing values, so it must instead use some special value like 99 or -999.


If possible, handle this when reading in the data, for example, by using thenaargument toreadr::read_csv(), e.g.,read_csv(path, na = "99"). If you discover the problem later, or your data source doesn’t provide a way to handle it on read, you can usedplyr::na_if():


```
x <- c(1, 4, 5, 7, -99)
na_if(x, -99)
#> [1]  1  4  5  7 NA
```


### 18.2.3NaN


Before we continue, there’s one special type of missing value that you’ll encounter from time to time: aNaN(pronounced “nan”), ornotanumber. It’s not that important to know about because it generally behaves just likeNA:


```
x <- c(NA, NaN)
x * 10
#> [1]  NA NaN
x == 1
#> [1] NA NA
is.na(x)
#> [1] TRUE TRUE
```


In the rare case you need to distinguish anNAfrom aNaN, you can useis.nan(x).


You’ll generally encounter aNaNwhen you perform a mathematical operation that has an indeterminate result:


```
0 / 0 
#> [1] NaN
0 * Inf
#> [1] NaN
Inf - Inf
#> [1] NaN
sqrt(-1)
#> Warning in sqrt(-1): NaNs produced
#> [1] NaN
```


## 18.3Implicit missing values


So far we’ve talked about missing values that areexplicitlymissing, i.e. you can see anNAin your data. But missing values can also beimplicitlymissing, if an entire row of data is simply absent from the data. Let’s illustrate the difference with a simple dataset that records the price of some stock each quarter:


```
stocks <- tibble(
  year  = c(2020, 2020, 2020, 2020, 2021, 2021, 2021),
  qtr   = c(   1,    2,    3,    4,    2,    3,    4),
  price = c(1.88, 0.59, 0.35,   NA, 0.92, 0.17, 2.66)
)
```


This dataset has two missing observations:

- Thepricein the fourth quarter of 2020 is explicitly missing, because its value isNA.

Thepricein the fourth quarter of 2020 is explicitly missing, because its value isNA.

- Thepricefor the first quarter of 2021 is implicitly missing, because it simply does not appear in the dataset.

Thepricefor the first quarter of 2021 is implicitly missing, because it simply does not appear in the dataset.


One way to think about the difference is with this Zen-like koan:


> An explicit missing value is the presence of an absence.An implicit missing value is the absence of a presence.


An explicit missing value is the presence of an absence.


An implicit missing value is the absence of a presence.


Sometimes you want to make implicit missings explicit in order to have something physical to work with. In other cases, explicit missings are forced upon you by the structure of the data and you want to get rid of them. The following sections discuss some tools for moving between implicit and explicit missingness.


### 18.3.1Pivoting


You’ve already seen one tool that can make implicit missings explicit and vice versa: pivoting. Making data wider can make implicit missing values explicit because every combination of the rows and new columns must have some value. For example, if we pivotstocksto put thequarterin the columns, both missing values become explicit:


```
stocks |>
  pivot_wider(
    names_from = qtr, 
    values_from = price
  )
#> # A tibble: 2 × 5
#>    year   `1`   `2`   `3`   `4`
#>   <dbl> <dbl> <dbl> <dbl> <dbl>
#> 1  2020  1.88  0.59  0.35 NA   
#> 2  2021 NA     0.92  0.17  2.66
```


By default, making data longer preserves explicit missing values, but if they are structurally missing values that only exist because the data is not tidy, you can drop them (make them implicit) by settingvalues_drop_na = TRUE. See the examples inSection 5.2for more details.


### 18.3.2Complete


tidyr::complete()allows you to generate explicit missing values by providing a set of variables that define the combination of rows that should exist. For example, we know that all combinations ofyearandqtrshould exist in thestocksdata:


```
stocks |>
  complete(year, qtr)
#> # A tibble: 8 × 3
#>    year   qtr price
#>   <dbl> <dbl> <dbl>
#> 1  2020     1  1.88
#> 2  2020     2  0.59
#> 3  2020     3  0.35
#> 4  2020     4 NA   
#> 5  2021     1 NA   
#> 6  2021     2  0.92
#> # ℹ 2 more rows
```


Typically, you’ll callcomplete()with names of existing variables, filling in the missing combinations. However, sometimes the individual variables are themselves incomplete, so you can instead provide your own data. For example, you might know that thestocksdataset is supposed to run from 2019 to 2021, so you could explicitly supply those values foryear:


```
stocks |>
  complete(year = 2019:2021, qtr)
#> # A tibble: 12 × 3
#>    year   qtr price
#>   <dbl> <dbl> <dbl>
#> 1  2019     1 NA   
#> 2  2019     2 NA   
#> 3  2019     3 NA   
#> 4  2019     4 NA   
#> 5  2020     1  1.88
#> 6  2020     2  0.59
#> # ℹ 6 more rows
```


If the range of a variable is correct, but not all values are present, you could usefull_seq(x, 1)to generate all values frommin(x)tomax(x)spaced out by 1.


In some cases, the complete set of observations can’t be generated by a simple combination of variables. In that case, you can do manually whatcomplete()does for you: create a data frame that contains all the rows that should exist (using whatever combination of techniques you need), then combine it with your original dataset withdplyr::full_join().


### 18.3.3Joins


This brings us to another important way of revealing implicitly missing observations: joins. You’ll learn more about joins inChapter 19, but we wanted to quickly mention them to you here since you can often only know that values are missing from one dataset when you compare it to another.


dplyr::anti_join(x, y)is a particularly useful tool here because it selects only the rows inxthat don’t have a match iny. For example, we can use twoanti_join()s to reveal that we’re missing information for four airports and 722 planes mentioned inflights:


```
library(nycflights13)

flights |> 
  distinct(faa = dest) |> 
  anti_join(airports)
#> Joining with `by = join_by(faa)`
#> # A tibble: 4 × 1
#>   faa  
#>   <chr>
#> 1 BQN  
#> 2 SJU  
#> 3 STT  
#> 4 PSE

flights |> 
  distinct(tailnum) |> 
  anti_join(planes)
#> Joining with `by = join_by(tailnum)`
#> # A tibble: 722 × 1
#>   tailnum
#>   <chr>  
#> 1 N3ALAA 
#> 2 N3DUAA 
#> 3 N542MQ 
#> 4 N730MQ 
#> 5 N9EAMQ 
#> 6 N532UA 
#> # ℹ 716 more rows
```


### 18.3.4Exercises

- Can you find any relationship between the carrier and the rows that appear to be missing fromplanes?

## 18.4Factors and empty groups


A final type of missingness is the empty group, a group that doesn’t contain any observations, which can arise when working with factors. For example, imagine we have a dataset that contains some health information about people:


```
health <- tibble(
  name   = c("Ikaia", "Oletta", "Leriah", "Dashay", "Tresaun"),
  smoker = factor(c("no", "no", "no", "no", "no"), levels = c("yes", "no")),
  age    = c(34, 88, 75, 47, 56),
)
```


And we want to count the number of smokers withdplyr::count():


```
health |> count(smoker)
#> # A tibble: 1 × 2
#>   smoker     n
#>   <fct>  <int>
#> 1 no         5
```


This dataset only contains non-smokers, but we know that smokers exist; the group of smokers is empty. We can requestcount()to keep all the groups, even those not seen in the data by using.drop = FALSE:


```
health |> count(smoker, .drop = FALSE)
#> # A tibble: 2 × 2
#>   smoker     n
#>   <fct>  <int>
#> 1 yes        0
#> 2 no         5
```


The same principle applies to ggplot2’s discrete axes, which will also drop levels that don’t have any values. You can force them to display by supplyingdrop = FALSEto the appropriate discrete axis:


```
ggplot(health, aes(x = smoker)) +
  geom_bar() +
  scale_x_discrete()

ggplot(health, aes(x = smoker)) +
  geom_bar() +
  scale_x_discrete(drop = FALSE)
```


The same problem comes up more generally withdplyr::group_by(). And again you can use.drop = FALSEto preserve all factor levels:


```
health |> 
  group_by(smoker, .drop = FALSE) |> 
  summarize(
    n = n(),
    mean_age = mean(age),
    min_age = min(age),
    max_age = max(age),
    sd_age = sd(age)
  )
#> # A tibble: 2 × 6
#>   smoker     n mean_age min_age max_age sd_age
#>   <fct>  <int>    <dbl>   <dbl>   <dbl>  <dbl>
#> 1 yes        0      NaN     Inf    -Inf   NA  
#> 2 no         5       60      34      88   21.6
```


We get some interesting results here because when summarizing an empty group, the summary functions are applied to zero-length vectors. There’s an important distinction between empty vectors, which have length 0, and missing values, each of which has length 1.


```
# A vector containing two missing values
x1 <- c(NA, NA)
length(x1)
#> [1] 2

# A vector containing nothing
x2 <- numeric()
length(x2)
#> [1] 0
```


All summary functions work with zero-length vectors, but they may return results that are surprising at first glance. Here we seemean(age)returningNaNbecausemean(age)=sum(age)/length(age)which here is 0/0.max()andmin()return -Inf and Inf for empty vectors so if you combine the results with a non-empty vector of new data and recompute you’ll get the minimum or maximum of the new data1.


Sometimes a simpler approach is to perform the summary and then make the implicit missings explicit withcomplete().


```
health |> 
  group_by(smoker) |> 
  summarize(
    n = n(),
    mean_age = mean(age),
    min_age = min(age),
    max_age = max(age),
    sd_age = sd(age)
  ) |> 
  complete(smoker)
#> # A tibble: 2 × 6
#>   smoker     n mean_age min_age max_age sd_age
#>   <fct>  <int>    <dbl>   <dbl>   <dbl>  <dbl>
#> 1 yes       NA       NA      NA      NA   NA  
#> 2 no         5       60      34      88   21.6
```


The main drawback of this approach is that you get anNAfor the count, even though you know that it should be zero.


## 18.5Summary


Missing values are weird! Sometimes they’re recorded as an explicitNAbut other times you only notice them by their absence. This chapter has given you some tools for working with explicit missing values, tools for uncovering implicit missing values, and discussed some of the ways that implicit can become explicit and vice versa.


In the next chapter, we tackle the final chapter in this part of the book: joins. This is a bit of a change from the chapters so far because we’re going to discuss tools that work with data frames as a whole, not something that you put inside a data frame.

- In other words,min(c(x, y))is always equal tomin(min(x), min(y)).↩︎

In other words,min(c(x, y))is always equal tomin(min(x), min(y)).↩︎
